.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.TH git-mesh 1  "git-mesh 1.0.121" 
.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.SH NAME
git\-mesh \- Track implicit semantic dependencies in a git repo.
.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBgit\-mesh\fR [\fB\-\-perf\fR] [\fB\-\-mesh\-dir\fR] [\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR] [\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR] [\fIsubcommands\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B git mesh
tracks implicit semantic dependencies in a Git repository: couplings between
line ranges (or whole files), in code or prose, that no schema, type, or test
enforces.
Each
.B mesh
anchors the participating anchors and carries a durable
.I why
\[em] one prose sentence that names the relationship the anchored set holds
and survives a rewrite of either side.
.PP
The standing question at commit time: did this change create or rely on a
coupling that is not visible from the lines themselves?
.PP
.B Writing the why.
Name the relationship the anchors hold in one prose sentence, written so it
survives a rewrite of either side.
Describe the relationship in role\-words (\(lqthe doc,\(rq \(lqthe parser,\(rq
\(lqthe runbook,\(rq \(lqthe migration\(rq) rather than repeating filenames.
For asymmetric relationships, name which side is normative:
\(lqthe doc is the source of truth when they disagree.\(rq
Do not restate the mesh name, embed incidental implementation details, or
bundle ownership and review triggers in the why.
.PP
.B Re\-anchoring on drift.
When
.B git mesh stale
reports drift, review the change at each anchor.
If the relationship still holds, re-anchor with
.B git mesh add
and commit.
If the relationship has changed, update the why with
.B git mesh why
before re-anchoring.
.PP
Each mesh is an ordinary tracked file under the mesh root (default
.IR .mesh ,
overridable with
.BR \-\-mesh\-dir ,
the
.I GIT_MESH_DIR
environment variable, or
.IR "git config git-mesh.dir" ).
Meshes are versioned, fetched, and pushed exactly like any other
tracked file \[em] stage and commit edits with
.B git add .mesh && git commit
\&.
.PP
Bare invocations:
.RS 4
.TP
.B git mesh
List every mesh in the repository.
.TP
.BI git\ mesh\  <name>
Show one mesh (anchors, why, config).
.RE
.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-perf\fR
Emit performance timings for major git\-mesh operation groups to stderr.

Can also be enabled with `GIT_MESH_PERF=1`.
.TP
\fB\-\-mesh\-dir\fR \fI<MESH_DIR>\fR
Mesh root directory (default: .mesh). Overrides GIT_MESH_DIR and git config git\-mesh.dir
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print help (see a summary with \*(Aq\-h\*(Aq)
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print version
.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
git\-mesh\-show(1)
Show the named mesh — its anchors, why, and config. Equivalent to the bare `git mesh <name>` positional form
.TP
git\-mesh\-list(1)
List files and anchors currently tracked by a mesh
.TP
git\-mesh\-stale(1)
Report anchors whose content has drifted from their anchored state
.TP
git\-mesh\-add(1)
Add anchors to a mesh, writing the mesh file under the mesh root. Stage and commit the change with `git add .mesh && git commit`
.TP
git\-mesh\-remove(1)
Remove anchors from a mesh, editing the mesh file under the mesh root. Stage and commit the change with `git add .mesh && git commit`
.TP
git\-mesh\-why(1)
Read or stage the mesh\*(Aqs why — a one\-sentence definition of the subsystem, flow, or concern the anchors collectively form
.TP
git\-mesh\-delete(1)
Delete a mesh
.TP
git\-mesh\-move(1)
Rename a mesh
.TP
git\-mesh\-doctor(1)
Audit the local mesh setup
.TP
git\-mesh\-tree(1)
Trace blast radius: render a clique\-grouped impact tree rooted at the files matched by the given paths/globs
.TP
git\-mesh\-merge\-driver(1)
Resolve `.mesh/` merge conflicts structurally when invoked by git as a merge driver. Receives three clean blob temp files and the marker length from git. Resolves only what is structurally derivable without trusting the worktree (which may be mid\-merge); defers same\-anchor range/hash divergence by writing minimal conflict markers and exiting non\-zero so `git mesh stale \-\-fix` can finish authoritatively
.TP
git\-mesh\-history(1)
Show a chronological timeline of a mesh file\*(Aqs git history: each commit where the mesh changed, rendered oldest→newest, with the content of any anchor that was added, modified, or removed, and an optional `current` entry describing how the working tree has drifted from HEAD
.TP
git\-mesh\-help(1)
Print this message or the help of the given subcommand(s)
.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.SH VERSION
v1.0.121
.SH EXAMPLES
Anchor a new mesh alongside a code change:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
git mesh add billing/charge-request-contract \e
    docs/api/charge.md#L40-L88 api/charge.ts#L30-L76
git mesh why billing/charge-request-contract \e
    -m "The doc states the request body shape the parser honors; \e
the doc is the source of truth when they disagree."
git add .mesh
git commit -m "Wire checkout to charge API"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Document an existing relationship anchored at HEAD:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
git mesh add auth/token-contract --at HEAD \e
    packages/auth/token.ts#L88-L104 \e
    packages/auth/crypto.ts#L12-L40
git mesh why auth/token-contract \e
    -m "Token verification depends on signature verification."
git add .mesh && git commit -m "Document token/crypto coupling"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check for drift and inspect a mesh:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
git mesh stale
git mesh billing/charge-request-contract
git mesh show billing/charge-request-contract
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1),
.BR gitcli (7)
